four three two one boom guy will thing
going on here now well circle Oh Jeff
Merry Christmas what's up Joe you two
not been the easiest weekend in my life
for my career's last week but hanging in
there to make this stand alone so that
people don't have to go figuring this
out on their own and I'm sure many many
fans are tuning and already know that
the gist of the details let's lay this
out from the beginning Jon Jones initial
failed test yeah so that was July of
2017 he tested positive for
approximately 20 anywhere from twenty to
sixty pica grams of a long-term
metabolite known as the m3 metabolite of
a substance called de
hydrochlorothiazide own THC MT also
known as oral Torino ball and this was
over a year ago what was determined to
be the source of this stuff never
determined what the source was so John
went through a full arbitration hearing
was never able to determine where it
came from
tested all the supplements he was using
you know went through many interviews
with you sada had a full on arbitration
hearing the source was never determined
where it came from why was his
suspension so low or so short well it
wasn't a termined so I mean there's many
factors that go into what that
suspension was I would argue in the
toe-tap totality of the evidence that
was presented in that arbitration that
it wasn't a short suspension because
really one key thing came out at
arbitration so John went to arbitration
before an individual by name of Richard
McLaren Richard McClaren has an
arbitration group up in Canada and
McLaren is probably worldwide known as
one of the most credible guys in
anti-doping
I know you had that the Icarus producer
director on the McLaren report was the
report that came from all that he
basically investigated the Russian state
being involved in doping and Sochi games
and put out actually a series of reports
on it detailing it up to 1,000 Russian
athletes you know we're breaking the
rules and the Russian laboratory was
helping them get around it so he's a
very very respected guy he's independent
of obviously the UFC he's independent of
you sada he acts on his own and his
determination was his determination and
I'll read you kind of what he said he
said I find that all evidence available
to me leads me to conclude that the
violation was not intended nor could it
have enhanced the athletes performance
so a non intentional so non-intentional
ingestion I mean there's no argument
that it was in his system but he found
the evidence to show non-intentional use
and then he went further saying that
based on the numbers of what he saw in
the evidence there was not even a
performance enhancing benefit afforded
to Jon for having this long term
metabolites in his system and I think
that's significant when you talk about
hey 15 months was that that's you know
kind of light being that this is the
second time through I would argue that
if there was an argument that maybe it's
on the higher end and certainly you know
we'll talk about the California
Commission Andy foster took that
position in John's recent California
hearing he was a little bit critical of
you sada he thought you know he's
intimately familiar with his evidence
both in the previous case and this
occurrence that and he also saw that
there was no evidence that an
independent arbitrator you know made
this statement and decision of John
intentionally cheating so if anything
you know I'd say that potentially there
could be an argument that that it was
you know on the higher end versus the
lower end because of the fact that it
was an unintentional ingestion exactly
now what is Jon's excuse what is what is
Jon said how he got this into assistant
yeah well look you know and it's
detailed in the arbitration hearing at
all Jon Jon fully admits that you know
some of the lifetime lifestyle decisions
he was making you know the partying and
things you know probably did not lead to
to making smart decisions and making
smart choices in terms of what was being
ingested in the body but certainly his
testimony was under oath
that I have never intentionally cheated
and did not intentionally put this
substance in my body and not only this
case but as we talked about the
subsequent case here I think you'll see
that based on the numbers you know
coming out of his tests and based on
some studies that have been done on some
of these substances it would tend to
support that okay correct me if I'm
wrong but didn't John test negative then
test positive for extremely low numbers
this is the initial test before we get
into the most recent filter he did so
that's negative then test positive very
shortly after with a very small trace
amount correct so he had two negative
tests on July 7th and July 8th I believe
of 2017 and then way and day I think it
was July 28th he was positive for a very
low level of the M 3 metabolites and and
we might as well start here so again
going back to Icarus so remember
remember the doctor I mean he's the main
character than that were chenkov in 2011
he put out a study on oral tour in a
bowl he actually my understanding is
dosed himself and then studied the
excretion of his urine and what was
coming out of it over the weeks and
months after and determined that there
were multiple may be up to 50
metabolites that once this D HCM tea was
ingested into the body the body
converted into other substances and he
was these metabolites stayed around he
identified some short-term metabolites
some medium-term metabolites and some
long-term metabolites specifically the
m3 that John's tested positive for so
these long-term metabolites would
indicate that it was taken a long time
ago they would stay around for the
longest why I was he testing negative
and then testing positive for these
extremely so yeah the numbers that's a
good question and that's that's
basically the question and point but
what was not occurring and what has
never occurred in any of John samples is
any presence of the short and medium
term metabolites and if you look at rich
ANCA of study he identifies a couple of
these medium term metabolites Roman
numeral 1
in Roman numeral 2 and he says these
metabolites based on his study will stay
in the body at least 22 days well let's
look back to the July 7th and 8th you
know positive tests he's negative on
July 7th and 8th for everything for the
parent compound for the short-term
medium-term metabolites and the
long-term metabolites go 20 21 days
later so within that 22 day window which
his study shows the short and
medium-term metabolites would still be
showing up and there's no presence
whatsoever of the short or medium-term
metabolites now again we'll get into
this a little bit more but I think the
science of what it's showing is a
pulsing effect for this long-term
metabolite meaning once you ingest
whether intentionally or non
intentionally oral Tour in a ball into
the body the body breaks it down
produces short term and medium term
which is you know visible for a short
and medium amount of time and then this
m3 which is produced for a long period
of time I think with the issue appears
to be and we'll get into this the UFC
program is not the only program that's
seen this there's another professional
sports league that has seen it very
frequently you sod has also seen this on
the Olympic side but we're seeing this
strange action with the long term and
three metabolites and the theory is it
may be hiding in the fat tissues
surrounding organs and maybe have a
pulsing effect where it's released at
certain times and other times you can't
detect it and this is not the actual
substance itself puts a metabolite
correct which indicates a reaction to
this substance it indicates the body
breaking down the parent compound the
the world turning a ball and turning it
into these other things which are stored
in the bodies these metabolites are not
performance-enhancing drugs that are the
result of the breakdown of the parent
drug in the body now what how much time
is it detectable the actual drug itself
so pretty quick it's a pretty quick
clearance time I think we're tank off
studies says you know maybe a week so
it's not around for very long and that's
why he conducted the study ironically
enough and I was gonna go watch vigorous
here last night and I just
I've had too much going on the last week
to kind of refresh my mind but
apparently he knew this was part of his
protocol for Russian athletes he knew a
coach that was still giving the world
tour in a ball to Russian athletes and
he had a falling out with the coach so
he goes off on the side and studies hey
the parent compound is gonna get in and
out of the body pretty quick it's gonna
be difficult to detect that let's try to
figure out what stays around and leaves
markers in the body for a long time and
so he developed these short and
long-term metabolite tests and was able
to catch some of this coaches athletes
for using the world tour in a ball
interesting so the actual drug itself is
gone from the system but the metabolite
remains now what is the window that this
metabolite is supposed to be detectable
in the body because we're talking now
what are we at like 18 months yeah so
here's the flaw was it initial ingestion
yep because my question is these same
long-term metabolites these existed a
year plus ago it was more than a year
how long ago that that's the that so
July 2017 was the initial test so when
all the experts and we'll get through
this with all the experts are telling us
is there is no evidence of reinjection
and most likely this is still remnants
from the July 2017 test however it was
to enter into a system and we'll go
through some of these testing numbers
that have shown negatives followed by
very low level pika-pika Graham quality
question though was that the the
ingestion that happened that he tested
positive for in July of 2017 indicated a
long-term effect right it was a
long-term terminal that correct so
meaning it had already been in his
system for a year so it absolutely could
have predated you know the theory the
first time through was something had to
have entered his system between July 7th
and July 8th those negatives and this
low picogram reading on July 28th over
this last year there's been a lot of
study into this long-term metabolites as
I mentioned this isn't just a UFC issue
there's another major professional
sports league that for the time being
wants to keep their their testing
confidential but they've shared that
information with scientists with you
sada with myself okay they saw it on
multiple
occasions this pulsing effect over a
year where you'd see but this well over
a year we were trying to and a half
years now right if it's a year if it's a
if in July which a la 2017 you were
talking a year and a half right half
July 17 but right it could have been in
his system a year prior I don't know
yeah it could have been a couple months
so you're I don't know he had never
showed up for that m3 metabolite for he
had been tested you know for it you'd
been tested multiple times in the
program you from wrong you're the same
level isn't it approximately the same
picograms that exists today in 2018 that
were there in 2017 generally if you look
and we can go over these numbers it
fluctuates you know from single digits
it never gets into triple digits to to
mid double digits so there's some as low
as nine pica grams over that time there
was some at sixty pika gram a peak gram
to some of this preposterous is it's
insane and you know the the analogy that
I heard early on was and I think John
uses throw a pinch of salt an Olympic
swimming pool and I'm like okay well
that's you kind of wrap your head around
now let's go the other side let's talk
about something really small that we
know of and how many times you have to
break down that small particle to get to
a picogram so one grain of salt and we
all know what that looks like right you
put that in front of you and you split
that and I mentioned this week 50
million it's actually 58 million if you
split that 58 million times a grain of
salt
each one is a picogram I mean it's
incomprehensible the detection level and
how small that is
it really is it's crazy and how many
pica grams did they find in his system
so he's gone from and I'll read through
it here so here's here's since the
initial appearance of the m3 metabolite
here's what John's tests look like in
those pika gram readings so the first
one was collection date was July 28th
he had a concentration of ATP grams
however let me caution and I'll read
something from from an expert when you
get down to these pika gram levels the
science is somewhat in exact because
such a small amount so the variable the
plus or minus you know can be anywhere
from twenty thirty I've seen in some
instances fifty or sixty so with this
scientist name is his name is Larry
Bowers he was formerly the shot that you
saw at a science director he's currently
retired and independently consults
before that he ran an Olympic Olympic
Committee accredited laboratory at the
University of Indiana the guy's got 20
to 25 years of anti-doping experience
here's what he he told me about you know
when you're when you're analyzing small
pika gram levels although the two
respective laboratories report a
concentration I would caution against
becoming too fixated on the numbers
first the numbers are really estimates
of concentration and probably should be
considered a range about plus or minus
20 pika grams for ml and he said the
December 9th result would be in the
range of John so we'll get to that
between sixty and a hundred second while
the adjustment of concentration by
specific gravity attempts to deal with
the variability of urinary excretion
rates it is an exact is inexact and adds
variability to the estimates finally and
most importantly science has no clear
understanding of the variance of urinary
excretion of drugs at ultra-trace
concentrations so basically saying look
I mean we have a general idea how this
works in science but and I think this
instance comes to play be real careful
if you're gonna be the guy with the
pseudoscience out there saying wait a
second John jumped from 20 to 60 from
September to December and that means
here Ian jested it what he's saying here
is slow your roll on that that it's such
a small incomprehensible level that we
don't really know what those variances
are gonna look like now I think if we
saw jumps and John from single digits
eight or nine pica Graham to multiple
hundred digit pica grams there would be
a concern and maybe some readmit astray
ssin but the experts i've speaking to
when you're talking variability of 10 20
30 40 it's not that significant at the
picogram level what is the window
this long-term metabolites starts to
express itself like what you said
there's short term and there's medium
term this is the long term how long does
it take for the long yeah that's a good
question I don't have the answer to that
it may be in retain coves report here
and I would encourage those that are at
home you know playing playing scientist
at their computer
the Journal of steroid biochemistry and
molecular biology
Rodchenko of rights report detection and
mass spec spectrometric characterization
of novel long-term t hydrochloric
testosterone metabolites in human urine
I'm not sure when that long-term
metabolite how long it takes to show up
here's the problem though with this
substance he did a real brief study my
understanding is administered it to
himself that's the only study that
exists hmm
world tour in a Baldy HCM t2 my
understanding is not approved for use
for human consumption anywhere anywhere
in any country so you can't have
clinical trials ethically in the medical
world because it's just not legal to
give this to human beings so you know
we're we're already kind of behind the
eight-ball here and that you know it's
compared to other substances where you
can do clinical trials because they're
readily available be a prescription or
whatever this substance is not the
substance was created by the East
Germans in the 70s and 80s and was part
of their state-sponsored doping program
or they were doping their athletes can
you correct me if I'm wrong but I
believe what I've read is that this is
particularly effective when people are
cutting weight yeah I mean is that true
or is this just more I don't know not
that I think some may be confusing
corinna ball with oral chair in a ball
two completely different it's actually
very important yeah there's there's very
different effects on the body there's
very different windows in terms of
detection time explain that yeah you've
got to be really careful in this world
of performance-enhancing drugs there's
names that are interchangeable there's
different you know chemical names where
you change a little bit of that chemical
name that commune completely different
substance there's instances where the
chemical name is different but the
substance is actually this
so when trying to compare two substances
you know make sure if you're at home
doing that analysis you're comparing the
right ones straight to R in a ball is
different than oral to R in a bowl what
is the difference yeah I can't tell you
I'm not as familiar with Torino ball
other than it's not
oral to written ball so but there is a
difference in terms of the detection
window yeah there would be I mean
different substances create and throw
out different metabolites and different
substances have different detection
windows so I haven't done my study and
research on straight - Rinna ball other
than knowing it's different than the
substance here so Gregory Burton cough
that's I say right it was the only guy
to do an actual verified study correct
now is this study been is it been peer
reviewed yeah I mean it's it's published
in the Journal of steroid biochemistry
and molecular biology so in order to get
something published it needs to be
peer-reviewed right so the it's has it
been replicated anywhere not that I'm
aware no so just so we have one study
which is really fascinating correct so
we know that first of all we know this
is an effective steroid we know it works
yeah these Germans I think showed that
they wouldn't have been using it it's
not a difficult it's not an easy easy
substance to get ahold of look when it's
not approved for use anywhere in the
world it's only available on the black
market so you probably have to go to
China to get a manufactured or you know
research chemical supply company and
it's not supposed to be provided to to
humans now I'm certainly not attributing
this to you but there were rumors this
was one discussion was that one of the
possible ways he could have ingested
this and let's be very kind John likes
to party okay one of the things about
partying is people do cocaine and one of
the things about cocaine is sometimes
cocaine is cut with creatine one of the
things about creatine is oftentimes
you're buying cheap creatine it's but
one of the things that we've had with on
it on its our products are all
third-party verified but in the initial
goings when we try different
manufacturers especially for alpha brain
we found there were other trace elements
that were in alpha brain that weren't
supposed to be in there and it's because
of the vats that they mix these things
up with
and one of the things that we had heard
was that creatine oftentimes is made in
the same place where they might be
making oral to rent a ball they might be
making Anna ball they might be making a
bunch of different things and trace
amounts of this stuff can get into the
creatine they use creatine to cut
cocaine with this is this possible or am
I just yeah it's it's absolutely a
theory I don't you know I can't sit here
and said that happened but I will have
heard similar thing I have heard similar
things I know for a fact based on my
previous career I worked closely with
the DEA I was with the FDA I worked
cases involving Street distribution of
recreational drugs including cocaine I
know for a fact that creatine is one of
the most common substances that cocaine
is cut with because look yeah some more
color some more feel so getting back to
McClaren's arbitration decision I mean
this is publicly available record so I'm
not saying anything new but if McLaren
addresses at least John's lifestyle
around this time and he says the athlete
openly admitted to USANA that prior to
and for a period of time after the
reporting of his second adverse
analytical finding on July 28th 2017 the
athlete used illicit so-called street
drugs including cocaine now for me to
sit here and say hey that's where it
came from
I don't know that what's the time pretty
talking about there the athlete admitted
that prior to and for a period of time
after the reporting of a second adverse
analytical finding on July 27 2017
admitted so before that test and
sometime after okay so does that make
sense though if it's cut if that's what
we're the the source of it is does it
make sense that that would show up as a
long-term metabolite doesn't it need a
long time in the body to digest or do we
not know enough about the window of time
yeah I don't know if we know enough
about the window of time you know my my
theory and looking at it is even if
there's a small amount of the oral chair
in a ball in that it's going to for a
period of time show that parent compound
at a small peak of gram amount and the
short and midterm metabolites
in the small picogram amount we have
never seen those in the history of
John's testing it's only this long-term
metabolite so that may be indication
that it occurred maybe even prior to
what we're talking about here is it
something that could be accentuated in
some way by the weight cutting process I
absolutely think that could be a factor
there are studies not necessarily with
this but another substance clomiphene
and look I want that while I'm
cautioning people to be careful about
comparing different substances the
commonality between clomiphene which
there are multiple clinical studies on
because it is approved for use to be
distributed to humans and oral Terina
ball is they're both chlorinated so they
both contain a chlorine atom on the
molecule and there is a recently
published study on clomiphene and its
excretion rates again for those at home
that want to look it up the study was
published in The Endocrine Society
publication it's peer-reviewed the name
of it is HPT access effects and urinary
detection following clomiphene
administration and males so what they
did is they basically you know got a
group of males gave them a one-month
cycle of clomiphene you know I think 25
milligrams a day and then had them get
off and then continue to look at their
urine up to 261 days after and what you
saw and what you see in this study is
that pulsing effect so you know I'm
looking at some of the study subjects
here subject 1 on day 121 still showed
147 picograms of Coloma Fein day 128
showed 174 pika grams day 135 shows
nothing he's below the minimum courting
reporting limit and then day 149 he's
back up to 236 there are 1 2 3 4 5 6 out
of I think 12 subjects in that study
that showed this pulsing effect of this
chlorinated substance coming and going
again you know it's it's different than
oral tour in a ball but it has that
common factor of being chlorinated in
this study they do talk about a fat
tissue called the let me lick this up
and make sure I got this right
adipose tissue mm-hmm this is fat that
surrounds the internal organs it's one
of the last things that the body burns
when it's going you know starving itself
and going to fat it protects those
organs but yeah you look at these you
know extreme weight gains and cuts that
the UFC athlete goes through I don't
think you're gonna find possibly another
human subject anywhere that goes through
putting weight on other than wrestling
may be that I don't think Olympic
wrestling matches with an MMA fighter
goes through at least you know in my
experience over these three or four
years talking to those in the Olympic
world I think worth the extreme and it's
it's something obviously we've talked
about before we're trying to curtail but
you know there's there's clearly never
been a study for anybody who dehydrates
and read-write hydrates themselves to
the extent that some of our athletes do
you could never find there would never
be anybody with any ethics that would
support a study because some of that
dehydration exceeds World Health
Organization standards so there's no
studies out there you know on this stuff
but clearly you know looking from afar
I'd say that it likely has some impact
over what's being released by this
adipose tissue we should certainly talk
about that in the future the weight
cutting aspect of it so the but this
adipose tissue loss at extreme weight
cuts could potentially be the reason why
this stuff is excreting itself it's it's
definitely a theory out there what about
micro dosing so here's the thing with
micro dosing micro dosing is done with
endogenous substances so only test it
well I mean someone could try it was
something else but it the reason you
micro dosed with endogenous substances
is there already produced in the body
right so the theory of okay I'm gonna
micro dose oral tour in a ball well oral
tour in a ball still producing these
short-term and long-term metabolites in
theory whether you're taking a hundred
milligrams or one milligram
of oral to renob all those excretion
rates of those metabolites are still
going to be consistent they're going to
be in a much smaller lesser way to
bypass those excretion rates is there
way to mask that in some way I'm not
aware of any hi I'm sorry the only study
we have is Gregory correct that's it
correct
but you know just taking it from a
common-sense approach it's certainly you
know those that know about micro dosing
know that you micro dose with endogenous
substances things that are already
appearing in the body so your family
knows what to do with them knows what to
do and you're fooling you know not only
are these metabolizing and there's no
metabolites of them but you could also
be fooling the biological passport
that's the concern I think and why
people micro dose so you sod is looking
not only testing for specific substances
but our testosterone at the testosterone
ratios going up they're looking at at
blood values how many young red blood
cells how many mature red blood cells so
micro dosing in those two areas wouldn't
set off alarms in the biological
passport world I've never heard
personally of micro dosing of exogenous
substances that are not found in the
body micro dosing and my understanding
is done with things that are endogenous
body for people that are not familiar
with this terminology we're just talking
about micro dosing performance-enhancing
drugs because micro dosing in today's
world is a very common thing with
mushrooms and LSD you know right I mean
I saw a ton of micro dosing in the the
cycling world that Brian was tested on
testosterone EPO HGH all those natural
occurring in the body and I don't
produce any really red flagged
metabolite if you do I met very very
small levels bill the parent will clear
quickly not produce any metabolites and
will not throw off the biological
passport analysis is there I mean when
Victor Conte came out with clear and all
that stuff with BALCO they were they
were fooling people is it is it I mean
one of the things we've talked about
before is that it's a constant race to
try to keep up with more advanced
cheaters it is and you know what's
interesting in this I mean what if I
would have talked to you and maybe the
first time we did talk a couple years
ago
it's come a long way from them but
clearly if I were to talk to you 15 16
17 years ago when I got my start in the
anti-doping world I would have told you
definitively the testing is way behind
you know what's being used out there
they were testing able to test to
multiple nanogram limits that's as far
down as we can go now they can go down
to single digit pika gram there's
another professional sports league out
there that recently had a 1 picogram and
3 metabolites case I mean do the math
coming down from you know four or five
nanograms which used to be the lower
limit now 2 1 picogram 10,000 20,000
times I am almost under the theory that
the pendulum has swung maybe a little
bit too far in the other direction and
that that certainly is part of my job to
the UFC look I want to catch every
intentional cheater that's out there I
want to make sure we have a rock-solid
program use all the latest and greatest
you know techniques to do it but I also
want to keep an eye on it to make sure
it's being administrated fairly and when
you're getting down to detection of one
you know single-digit pika grams I have
a concern that what kind of level of
sensitivity we're talking about are we
going to talk about environmental
contamination where you walk you know
through a room and somebody has just
opened a container of something and
there's you know miniscule powders in
the air there are documented cases that
some of the regularly prescribed
prescription drugs specifically
diuretics are getting in water supplies
in some areas you know you get a lot of
old people on them that flush their old
pills down the toilet there's documented
cases of it getting into the water
supply and being detectable at that pika
gram level so you've got to be really
really careful about that and I think
you know this case exemplifies that you
saw it and and really the world
anti-doping agency world and community
are aware of that you know with greater
sensitivity and testing in my opinion
become you know makes greater
responsibility to be objective and look
fairly at what really we're doing here
Lord
detecting in that small amount but this
this test of John's
where he's testing for the same level of
pica grams today as he was in July of
2017 is it safe to say that this is
unprecedented repeat that again that
John's test for the same levels of pica
grams of these metabolites in 2018 that
he was testing for in 2017 this is
unprecedented no the answer's no it's so
may be unprecedented in the UFC program
but what the United States anti-doping
agency did over these last five or six
months as they reached out to the
science community outside the scope of
the UFC they reached out to other
professional sports organizations they
reached out to other why wada
Laboratories and what they were seeing
was multiple instances of this pulsing
effect where over time you would see a
reading right the next test it would go
away and the next time you'd see that
reading again maybe back up to or even
above this much like that was correct
yes so you see that in the claw in the
Coloma fein study here too I mean almost
260 what they stopped the study what it
was still appearing in pika gram levels
in some subjects and they stopped the
study at 261 days and you see those
numbers I was reading to you see this
one subjected 174 he's negative the next
time and then he pops up to 2 in the
200s after so it's actually more than
the time before again apples and oranges
different substances but the commonality
here is chlorinated substance fluorine
based so is is it safe to say that this
is an emerging science and that we're
still learning and understanding this as
we go along
absolutely it's still very young look
the first you know the the 1984 Olympics
in Los Angeles were established the
first drug testing laboratory by dr.
Catlin so really you know in the scope
of science going back to the earliest
days then they're talking about you know
what 30 30 years 30 35 years again when
I started off in their 16 or 17 years
the science still wasn't good they were
unable to detect anything in the
picogram level again for reference very
interesting so the the wada the world
anti-doping agency's accredits
laboratories across the world and they
have certain standards that those
laboratories must meet or to retain that
accreditation and keep that
accreditation so they have a technical
document called the minimum required
performance levels of their laboratories
so what they tell the laboratories is
you must detect these substances down to
this amount if you can't get them down
to this amount then you can't have an
accreditation from wada so the class of
substances that world tour in a ball
would be in which would be other
anabolic agents the required minimum
level that they must detect to is only
to nanograms hmm so look wada even says
as long as you can get to two nanograms
you can retain our accreditation well
what's happening is an arms race in
these laboratories they're saying well
two's the minimum standard but I can get
down further and you know these are
private entities that you know are
looking for for customers so to be able
to reach out and say well even though
wada tells us to is as low as we need to
go we can go down to 1 picogram I think
in a sense maybe you need to slow the
reins on that a little bit that we're
getting too far and too sensitive of a
level of detection when it comes to
implementing a fair program because you
can't determine where a 1 picogram came
from you could be breathing again
contaminated air drinking contaminated
water it gets real dangerous when you
get down that low now how does this
reflect on past suspensions this is what
when you deal with some like look let's
bring up Frank Mir for example didn't
Frank Mir also test for aural turn of
all okay I want to get back to Frank Mir
but let's let's go back to John and and
this instance and why you sada has come
out and said look this is not a
violation so if you go to the Wada the
world anti-doping code there's a section
ten point seven point four point one our
UFC program you know basically mirrors
that
and we're bringing that up on the screen
there so for purposes of imposing
sanctions under 10.7 an anti-doping rule
a ssin will only be considered a second
violation if the anti-doping
organisation can establish the athlete
or other person committed the second
anti-doping relation after the athlete
or other person received notice pursuant
to article 7 etc this is what's known as
a double jeopardy clause right can't me
sanction a guy test positive for
something and if he's test positive for
the exact same substance that is still
in his system a year later or whatever
the amount of time is you don't include
that as a new positive test one more
thing has to happen science has to
determine that it there hasn't been a
readmission so test positive for the
same substance and science says based on
other numbers we see there's no evidence
of any readmit astray ssin and the non
evidence of the readmission is the lack
of short-term and medium-term GABA
lights
Zingo never ever in john's you're an
issue though that this is only one test
that Gregory which anko's test is the
only study that showed that these medium
and short-term metabolites exist it's
the only study but I think then if
there's only one study you have to go to
anecdotal evidence right why do Studies
on UFC employees because China ball-ball
he'll do it oral tour in a ball is
illegal to distribute in any country
throughout the world is illegal oh they
just let you do whatever you want to do
I don't know maybe we can look into that
but Shelby may be up for that that's the
reason for living there I have a problem
with that in that we're relying on one
study this seems to me to be like a
critical thing that could affect I mean
we're we're hoping and we're we're
putting faith in this study that this is
the only way that these metabolites
express themselves is it possible that
what that these like you see with the
pulsing effect that you see positive
effects and negative or positive results
in negative results that these sure
term and medium-term metabolites don't
always express themselves and that what
we're considering a long-term metabolite
could in fact just be a metabolite yeah
I I mean I guess it's possible but what
are you are you gonna sanction an
athlete again because you know
potentially it's possible and then the
theory or not you can't do that let me
read to you real quick what what these
experts came out at in terms of readmit
astray ssin so dr. Daniel Eichner runs
the salt lake city it's called a smart
Sports Medicine Research testing
laboratory or Smurl they're one of two
watered accredited laboratories in the
United States the other one being a UCLA
again one of the most respected minds in
anti-doping PhD chemist his answer in
terms of readmit astray ssin was this
and you very rarely see scientists at
his level talk in absolute in absolutes
there you go and here he says there is
no evidence that DHC mt has been
readmitted that's in writing to us so
very definitive on that you sought a
science director now Dan Daniel is
independent even of you sadhus and those
who criticize hey you saw us in bed with
the UFC
Daniel Eichner doesn't work for you sada
he runs an independent laboratory you
saw to send samples there the NFL send
samples there Major League Baseball send
samples there the NCAA he's independent
owns his own laboratory you sada also
put out a letter to us in in writing
upon careful consideration of the very
low concentration of the DHC mt
long-term metabolite mr. Jones's sample
and taking into account the human
pharmacokinetic characteristics of this
particular long-term anabolic steroid
metabolites based on data to which you
saw it as access to and in consult in
consultation with scientific experts
some of whose and pinions are enclosed
you saw it as concluded consistent with
prior residual amounts detected and mr.
Jones sample that the presence of DHC MT
long-term metabolite is consistent with
residual amounts from exposure prior to
look I'm not an expert I don't profess
to be my backgrounds in finance and
accounting I traced the money back in
the old days but I know who those
experts are out there in the world and
these are them there by putting these
things in writing putting their
reputations on the line now and forever
going forward they're never gonna do
something like that because you know the
UFC pays you sada to administer our
program or because Jon Jones is you know
a popular fighter and they want to see
him fight this week and that's just not
the way this world works of course in
fact it works the opposite way there
would be a great benefit if they could
catch him cheating absolutely and you
know historically experts like this are
very very conservative when it comes to
talking in absolutes like this they
don't normally do it in all fairness the
real question is guys like you and me
because we are UFC employees so yeah we
got handle this fairly and I guess that
argument of course you know and I saw
that left and right that hey Jeff and
Joe are paid by the UFC of course
they're gonna come out in this way but
look all these things that I'm reciting
how would they ever do that in regards
to cheating I wouldn't either I've I
side with the UFC on a lot of things
because I support the sport I want to
excel I don't decide ever with cheating
if I think that there's some way somehow
that someone has given an unfair
advantage and it's just somehow being
covered up I would rather not work for
them Joe my 7 my last 17 years of my
career my it might my you know
everything that I've worked for is to
protect the rights of clean athletes and
to eradicate cheating from the sport I
can't tell you how strongly I feel about
that Sports giving me everything in my
life my dad was a high school basketball
coach it paid for my college and
scholarships it you know at least the
good characteristics and me I can all
trace directly to sports and entering
into the equation the issues of breaking
the rules the issues of the health and
safety aspects when you have young I
talked to many parents whose kids you
know use steroids because they saw the
professional athletes doing entering
that into the body when you're hormonal
levels are already out of control is
very very dangerous both short and long
term
can't tell you how passionate I am about
this issue and those out there that say
are say and then I'm corrupt and my
reputation is out the window I would
never ever in a million years sales
people I mean you obviously you have but
you you can't listen to those people
because they want to find things wrong
one of the things that I've said about
you is you're a guy who loves to catch
people cheating you like it you enjoy it
no that's not true man you do
I don't come on if someone is cheating
and you catch them well you know okay in
the UFC program now with what we've
established here absolutely back in the
old days and we talked about this look
when you had in baseball or in cycling
no testing going on literally
organizations were looking in the other
direction I've often said look I don't
agree with what they did but there's a
portion of me and that's why I think a
lot of these athletes respected me and
shared that information there's a
portion of me that said I don't agree
with what you did I'd like to think I
wouldn't made the same decision but I
damn well understand why you did this
you're fighting for millions of dollars
in contracts you know your teammates are
doing it you know you're you know
competitors are doing it and you know
your professional sports organization
doesn't give a shit because of the
weakness of the testing program or total
lack thereof
so when instances like that there was I
never came away saying that guy's an
idiot or an asshole for shoes and I came
away saying I kind of get why he did it
if I was 21 or 22 years old an immature
I may have made the same decision now
coming to our program here where you
have an organization that cares very
much that spends multi million dollars a
year this program has done nothing but
costs the UFC money causes money and how
we implement the program counseling
cautious money on canceling fights
anybody who thinks moving this fight to
California is that a financial benefit
to the UFC is crazy we're taking a bath
on this one people do really do need to
understand that the UFC decided
themselves they self-imposed you sod as
sanctioning of fights correct nobody
forced us to do that so this is this was
a big step in the right direction of
trying to make the sport cleaner because
we recognized that first of all there
was some legal stuff with
the testosterone replacement therapy
that just threw everything out of whack
right where it was essentially it was
sanctioned cheating I mean let's be
honest about what that was it was it was
clearly a my understanding being
manipulated yeah very easy to manipulate
when you get permission to use any
prohibited substance like that and we
went from that to unbelievably strict
protocols and now what you're seeing is
you're seeing first of all we saw a
radical change in the physiques of some
fighters where we we did have some
suspicions and those suspicions at least
in my eyes have been confirmed and now
we're seeing the good side of this with
what in your estimation might have been
moved over into a position where okay
now now it's getting a little bit
ridiculous in terms of like what we can
detect and what is what is causing
fights to be canceled exactly so
interestingly enough the world
anti-doping agency owada their next code
revision is 2021 and so they regularly
put out hey what are the issues going
forward that we want to address and one
of the major issues is potentially
establishing thresholds for these
low-level substances that keep appearing
THC mt being one of them austria being
one of them and so the idea that wada is
looking at and has a working group of
worldwide experts is hey if something
gets reported back at under 50 pika
grams all the evidence is showing more
likely than not this is from a very
low-level contaminant issue we've never
seen an issue of a micro dosing or an
intentional use that's reached that
level why are the labs even reporting at
sub at quantities lower than 50 pika
grams or a hundred pika grams I think
very soon they're going to come out with
a recommendation we are going to adopt
that before 2021 once that working group
and we're in communication with them
comes up with those recommendations
you'll see it implemented first in the
UFC program again I've always said
fairness due process in a program is
just as important of the strength and
comprehension comprehensiveness of that
program you
lose faith in your athletes you could
have the strongest loophole free program
in the world did you start implementing
things unfairly you'll lose faith just
as much as if you had a bunch of
loopholes in the program it's got to be
fair are you aware of the female skier
that tested positive because of lip balm
I see yeah it's vaguely recall about
that what was someone else use a lip
balm before her no no no no that it was
a lip balm for sunburn it was for
sunburned lips and it had some
ridiculously small trace amount was it
Austin seeing if her name is Joel Berg
well there was the the cocaine kissing
defense was actually won in arbitration
so something similar somebody tested
positive for you know low-level
metabolites of cocaine and basically
said look you know hey whether that was
good or not but you know the arbitrator
bought it and the science shows hey that
that is a possibility the detection
levels are so low
if you kiss somebody who had just done
cocaine they're now able to detect at
those levels in the person that kissed
that person that makes sense do you find
this woman get this doping label on the
label which is why they gave her a
penalty okay oh I see okay what is the
fucking labels on lip off you know see
that that's that's how crazy it's gotten
I mean all our athletes know when when
they're using a creatine or a protein or
whatever I think most of them are pretty
careful right now but to tell them hey
you need to read your lip mom and your
deodorant I mean where what level are we
getting to here right and these are the
levels of detection so she 21
nine-year-old star of norway's
powerhouse squad of skiing cross-country
skiing tested positive for an anabolic
agent listed in the contents of a
treatment for sunburn this could be
similar in some ways to what Chad Mendes
tested positive for for something for
psoriasis correct Chad Mendes has
obvious psoriasis you see it on his body
he's talked about it pretty openly and
he used some sort of a cream and
accepted his penalty wasn't aware this
cream
had something some type of a steroid
into it yeah I'd seen him publicly say
that now he chose not to present a
defense or go to arbitration so I
haven't seen anything in detail to my
view he wrote knowledgeable opinion on
that yeah he did so let's get back to
the Frank Mir case Frank Mir tested
positive was it also also same thing
long-term metabolite of World Tour in a
ball here's the difference Frank Mir was
the same as John Jones his first time
through was sanctioned John didn't get
off the first time this showed up in his
system he got you know he was looking at
potential for years went to arbitration
presented evidence enacted some other
clauses in the policy that reduced his
sanction what does that mean well one of
them was substantial assistance where he
assisted you sada in some way shape or
form and he got a reduction for for
doing that assisted in what way so I
don't know and this is the exact reason
why I do this so I insulate myself from
that interaction between you sadha and
the athlete they are the sole
adjudicator in this they do not you know
get me on the phone say hey we're
thinking about going this way they
adjudicate completely in a vacuum and
you are you're just some people know
your title is safety Health and Safety
athlete's health and performance vice
president of athlete's health and
performance yeah so you no longer work
for you saw I've never worked for you
snot and that's that's a big
misconception a lot of our fighters
think that I've never worked for you
sada I was a federal agent for twenty
two and a half years the latter part of
my career got involved with all these PE
D distribution cases 2015 Lorenzo
Fertitta and Dana White through a mutual
friend contacted me and said hey would
you come out and kind of talk to us
we're contemplating maybe put in our own
program together we've had some recent
high-profile positives so I came out to
Vegas talked with them and a week later
I get a phone call asking if I want to
come work for them and kind of implement
this new program but I've never been an
employee of USANA okay so that's that's
good to know because that's been stated
by some public figures that you used to
work for you sada and now you work for
the UFC never were they your shell
that's my favorite words so you never
work for you sada you brought you sada
to the UFC or communicated with you sada
and facilitated this agreement correct
so I I never worked for you sada I did
work very closely with you sada so you
sada when I first started these series
of investigations back in 2002 look I
knew all about how to work a heroin
distribution organization a cocaine
distribution organization
methamphetamine but when it came to
performance-enhancing drugs there was no
class that myself a really any other
federal agent or law enforcement agent
goes through surrounding distribution of
performance-enhancing drugs so I was
examining the discarded garbage of BALCO
every week when they put it out to the
curb began seeing notes rappers all
these substances I had no idea what
these things were I didn't know the
difference between testosterone at
potestas thrown erythropoietin
eighty-eights I knew nothing so what I
did is I figured out who those experts
were who were the people that could very
quickly get me up to speed on what I was
looking at dr. Catlin who ran the UCL
Olympic lie was one of the first and he
started you know kind of walking me
through this he put me in touch with you
sada and you know they began educating
me as well so over the course of those
investigations I got a lot from them in
terms of educating on these substances
they were bringing some of their
cooperating witnesses to me and then we
go off and running on Criminal
Investigations but never never worked
for them so you saw - correct me if I'm
wrong but the way they would work would
be very compartmentalized like they
would not specifically communicate with
you on all of the details of this
correct and they don't now I don't know
that the independence aspect I don't as
these deliberations are going on what
they're looking at I don't know
cooperation just for me to be frank
would in my eyes would mean that
something was done purposely illegally
and this person had some knowledge of
purpose purposeful illegal activity and
that they would somehow communicate this
to facilitate some sort of
of catching of someone involved in a
criminal act or an act of cheating yeah
now that would make sense to me - yeah
that would be what we're talking about
you sada would allow John a shorter
suspension if he actively participated
in helping them catch people that were
cheated that that's the understanding I
don't know one Clyde that would be
implied I don't know to what level that
was done I don't know if it was that or
if it was hey here's how this drug works
in more general years oh I don't know
what it was I purposely B that would
mean that John would have to know about
cheating if you're saying like this this
is how this jug drug works is how I used
it I mean this would he would that would
mean his initial defense would have to
be thrown out the window because it
wasn't an accident
well I mean I don't know about that if
you knew something separate from you
know that he did someone else yeah and
again I don't I don't want anybody to
reach that conclusion I have no idea
what his substantial assistance entailed
not right and that's a slippery slope it
is a slippery slope and look
transparency is important in any program
but you know only to a certain level
look if you were transparent about what
everyone's you know cooperation or
substantial assistant was and the whole
world knew about it you're never gonna
get anybody after that coming in and and
and and cooperating I saw this
definitely on the criminal side with you
know informants you don't that's not
something that's that you want to be
transparent about or disclose right but
there's gonna be a bunch of people that
have a real issue with that the idea
that John Jones you know one of the
greatest fighters of all time is
actually working as an informant I mean
it's it's listed in the in the you know
in MacLaren's ruling that that was one
of the reasons for the the mitigating
factor in the reduction but I don't
again just need to tell nothing about to
leave that alone
nothing about it it's been stated we
know what it is okay or we know that
it's a thing when it comes to the John's
initial tests where he was sanctioned
and was suspended for a determined
period of time Frank Mir also was
sanctioned it was for a determined
period of time as well he was two years
John shorter than that John
Sharan cooperate on a bunch of other
deal to things he you not only
cooperated he went to arbitration and
put on a defense he put on a defense
that look the evidence here shows no
intentional ingestion of it and in fact
McLaren gave him a further reduction
based on there was no evidence that this
was intentionally done Frank Mir didn't
put on any he had every right to go to
arbitration put on his own offense
didn't do that what about Josh Barnett
Josh Barnett you know completely
different set of facts his came from a
contaminated supplement it was a
different substance he went to an
arbitration hearing the arbitrator ruled
with Josh and said yep you know based on
where we are now based on the care and
effort that you took you're right you
deserve to have time served at the time
of that arbitration so again I think
that's a good example of the checks and
balances in place here you've got me
overseeing the program taking a look at
how these things come out you've got the
ability from the athlete to go to
McClaren's group and judge you know the
set of facts and in that case MacLaren's
group said you sada i think maybe you
overreached a little bit here and I
believe Josh and Josh's you know
basically time serve so you know you
want to see you want to see them get it
perfect right every time but you know
and the reality in the real world is
that doesn't necessarily happen and
that's why you have these checks and
balances available josh Barnett's take
on the matter is that they tried to
paint him as guilty even though he was
not and that he he feels like he
definitely got a bad deal
and that he was labeled as someone who
was taking this substance he was
suspended for a long period of time one
who's going through this and although he
was found not guilty that he feels like
not enough emphasis was put into
establishing that he was not guilty and
that you know he he feels like they
chased him down over something that he
didn't do yeah I mean well here's what
he did do is he used a supplement that
if he would have listened to anything
that we educate on that you sada sends
out regular reminders our fighters are
required on a quarterly basis to go
through videos and their whereabouts
filing that deals with these issues
if he would have followed any of that
advice when it came to his supplement
choices he would have never chosen the
supplement he used I you know when when
I heard about that supplement and what
was on the label and how it was marketed
I said okay well that's that's likely
the candidate of where it came from
yeah so I mean the analysis would be hey
you know that pool be careful there's
sharks swimming in that pool they can
eat you and the person jumps in the
water anyway saying look I didn't want
to get eaten by a shark but a shark
comes up and ate them it's like hey we
told you that this was the case you
didn't follow that now there also needs
to be a differentiation between someone
who's intentional cheating intentionally
cheating and someone that's just you
know makes a naive supplement choice
there there needs to be a
differentiation between that and there
was in that case Josh didn't get you
know the full penalty of what was what
that substance you know would have
rendered but he did have to go through a
long period of time where he was unable
to fight he did but you know again he
had the prohibited substance in his body
you saw it asked to look at hey even
though you did that didn't do that on
purpose
did that give you a performance
enhancing benefit did it allow you to
recover a little bit better did it make
you a little bit stronger and you know
that's why those strict liability
provisions are in there otherwise people
would just take these prohibited
supplements and say oh I didn't know
exactly it was just an accident
exactly meanwhile they're getting a
benefit for exactly so they have to have
some sort of penalty in place I think so
you know I also think again there needs
to be a differentiation between the
intentional and non-intentional and we
do have that in our policy there are
definitely mitigating factors available
in our policy that if you didn't do
thing on purpose you're not you know
you're not sanctioned as hi Tim means is
a great example there so Tim means used
a relatively benign supplement it was a
creatine creatine you know generally
doesn't have an issue as as opposed like
testosterone booster supplements we tell
our athletes stay away from anything
marketing as a testosterone booster is
one of the most common with contaminants
or purposely spiking purposeful spikings
Tim means uses a creatine it had
Austrian and a very small amount we
found it in there
Austrian is a two-year sanction you got
six months you know so back relatively
quickly so I think the same thing with
you ole Romero so correct
Yoel Romero used a natural diuretic
product that had asaram in it in all
these cases not only does the the
prohibited substance need to show up in
what the athlete has says they've used
already separate but to protect against
making sure the athlete isn't purposely
spiking it you sada will go out on their
own on the market independently procure
hopefully the same lot of product and in
the case of Yoel and Tim they were able
to do that test it completely
independently of the athlete determine
what level the prohibited substance is
in that based on the interview with the
athlete of how much did you use when's
the last time you used it relative to
this test do the science calculations
just to make sure an athletes not saying
well I know this creatine has spiked
with aa strain so I'm gonna go use AA
strain and then I have a built-in excuse
when I test positive for Austria in
order to be able to match contaminant
levels with what's being excreted in the
urine you would literally have to have
PhD chemistry degree and I'm not aware
of any are athletes having that to be
very very difficult to do that and so
these detection levels again we're
talking about nanograms we're not
talking about large quantities that were
pika grams grams correct now what why
was why was this moved from Vegas to
California and why why did the
California State Athletic Commission why
did they accept this fight taking place
here and why did Vegas say no to it so
internally UFC wise we first in fact
Donna mark Leaney who you know who works
with me were found out to Donna exactly
we're a two-person shot and the woman's
a hawk's one of the hardest workers I
know so she's she's awesome she's taking
a look at something that we have access
to called the Clearing House and it's
basically a recording of all the tests
on our athletes so we can get on there
somebody says hey how many times was
John tested last quarter we can get on
there and pull that up the public also
has access to our testing records
not with a specificity that the
Clearinghouse has but the public can get
on and you saw it on a weekly basis
updates how many tests and athletes done
so there's some of these some guys out
there on the internet from the day one
of the program have kept track of what
week their numbers tick up so you can go
find spreadsheets on the Internet at
least from Oh from a weekly basis of
when our athletes were tested and how
many times every week god bless those
dorks crazy huh so the clearinghouse
program is very specific we can get on
there and see the actual date of the
collection and next to that we see
negative positive or pending so Donna
came to me late November early December
saying hey I'm looking at you know
John's tests and I'm seeing pending
still back from it was maybe August
September yeah you think something's
going on here and of course I'm like
okay well he's fighting pretty soon I
hope not but let me reach out to USANA
so I reached out to them they said we're
working on something were you know
conducting a study we're talking other
professional sports leagues we're
talking to the laboratories out there
and don't have an answer for you now
that let's stand by so I think it was
September 6th they sent a letter to us
and they sent a letter to the Nevada
State Athletic Commission saying just so
you we're over the last six months early
in this six months we've seen a real
murder of this long-term metabolite in
John's samples we saw is this so this
was early December December sixth okay
we and the Nevada Athletic Commission
were notified you were notified but the
test was from previous just so the test
these tests covered from August through
November okay so that's 2008 test
several of them
oh so more than one test showed this
metabolite so what they said was August
ninth negative August 29th eight peak
grams September eighteenth eight eight
September 18th so I mean there's a
there's a good so he's negative on the
ninth 20 days later so inside the 22 ten
comes Tony dude a window he
an8 pika gram no short-term metabolites
no long-term no parent no medium-term no
medium I'm sorry no medium only
long-term thank you we then go to the
18th of September 19 pika grams and then
that's followed by 4 negative tests
September 21st October 2nd October 11th
and November 14th so at this point late
November early December
you saw it says okay we've done our
studying those to low levels in August
are residual there's no evidence of any
readmit astray ssin based on lack of
short and medium term and parent based
on our consultation with other leagues
with these labs that are seeing this
we're calling this this is would be
double jeopardy if we did them again
this is something that should be really
emphasized because there's a lot of
people that don't understand this this
is not just this one test these are many
tests that have been done over the
course of John's suspension and then
ultimately relicensing that are showing
this exact same metabolite at a very
similar level that according to previous
tests specifically on clomiphene that
this could be this pulsing correct
result of existing and not existing but
this is not indicative in any way that
can be provable of micro dosing
correct and not only that but this is
over we're talking about this being over
long term long periods of time many
months yes okay and consistent numbers
over many months yes so and again going
back to to what one expert dr. Bower
said you've got to be cared what you're
talking about
single double long number grams and you
see some variants you've got to be
careful about saying well it went from 9
to 18 that means readmit astray ssin no
it's in exact science at that level the
water labs this is a non threshold
substance so all's water requires them
to say to report back to whadda positive
or negative they're not required to
quantify
however these water labs have also
realized there's an issue when you're
getting none topeka grams so what
they're doing is going back
after reporting the positive hey let's
see if we can estimate what this level
is it's an inexact science at pika gram
quantities in my understanding - you
know estimate what those levels are you
can see some variations so Nevada is
unwilling to sanction the fight based on
all this information so they get they
get the initial notice that we got also
I think it was December 6 saying look
there was an issue in in August these
long term metabolites reappeared again
but we've since had four negative tests
we don't believe that the August you
know reappearance is a readmit astray
ssin there's no sanction here nevada you
don't even have jurisdiction over the
august tests again keep in mind these
are UFC tests nevada doesn't mandate it
but nevada says look closer to a fight
we do take jurisdiction we will adopt
these you saw two tests so you thought
it didn't need to notify they thought
out of an abundance of caution let's let
Nevada know that this issue exists damn
you sorrow what the so they said but hey
wait that's that's all good you saw that
against this yeah I talked with them
they're like whoa this is right this is
concerning but we don't see anything
within our jurisdiction here so I
certainly hope that no subsequent tests
show up positive because that could be
an issue and sure enough you saw two
collects a sample from John on twelve
nine they expedited the results because
they knew a fight was coming up and they
do that now when fights are closed or
the collections are done close to a
fight and here you know he pulses back
up to you know between sixty and eighty
pika grams so Nevada gets this this was
last week man the days of run together
for me so a week ago Friday we have in
bob bennett who's the executive director
well I'm a big fan of these great I say
I talked about Nevada but a former FBI
agent so we got round is he's one of the
reasons why it probably wasn't
sanctioned in Nevada was because they're
so by-the-book I get angry because I
wanted to fight to be in Nevada but yeah
I understand Bob's position then
implicitly so so let me make clear what
happened Bob came in anthony martin l
the chairman of the commission came in
and
representatives from the Nevada Attorney
General's Office so they are the ones
that prosecute and you know cases
involving PE D use that violates Nevada
regs so we share all this with them and
lists like you did with me correct share
it all with them and look there's some
misconception out there they did not say
this fight absolutely not happened in
next week in fact they I think we're
understanding these issues but said look
you know optically this doesn't look
great and we feel that out of an
abundance of caution that we need to
have a public hearing and be very
transparent about this because this is
this is some weird shit this was last
Friday so over eight days out from the
fight and so you know we start talking
about hey when can we potentially have
this and unfortunately Christmas holiday
several of the commissioners weren't
even in town and basically what they
said is look we will absolutely do this
if you want us to but likely that
hearing would not be until today
Thursday or maybe tomorrow Friday and
you know Marnell is like look I am
starting to get my head around this but
I can't guarantee you that my other
commissioners or me are gonna come out
the same way so you're taking you know
you're taking a chance here that that we
could say well we need more information
so so basically they were willing to
listen to it I think they were starting
to wrap their heads around it but didn't
feel that they were up to speed enough
on it they didn't have the luxury that
Andy Foster and California have remember
when Jon tested positive in July 2018
that fight was in California because
that fight was in California California
retained jurisdiction they've had two
very public hearings on John when they
suspended his license and most recently
a week and a half ago when they
reinstated his license so Andy and the
Commission were very familiar with the
world term in a ball they were very
familiar with the long term metabolites
and in fact Andy was somewhat critical
of you sada during the last hearing he
thought after looking at all the details
after
reading you know MacLaren's position
that there was no evidence that this was
done on purpose he thought men maybe
they went a little bit hard on him and
he stated that in that in that second
hearing so with the re-emergence of the
the picogram quantity of this m3
long-term metabolite Andy in the
Commission
unlike Nevada didn't need to get up in
speed on it they've already had two
public hearings on John's issue they
were intimately familiar with you know
some of these dynamics of this drug and
the metabolites and that's why he felt
comfortable based on their familiars
ation with it and based on these written
absolute statements by these experts so
there was no reinjection one and then
the second thing which we haven't
covered is these experts said based on
these low-level picograms there's no
performance enhancing benefit and that's
an important point because if you would
have told UFC look this is still
remnants from a year and a half ago but
we can't rule out that he's not getting
a performance enhancing benefit from it
well in that instance I'll tell you and
you know I stand by this I would I would
leave this company if somebody told me
otherwise if there was any indication
that there would be a benefit from him
even though it technically wasn't a
violation I'm not gonna stand by while
anybody licenses that guy to fight could
it been could this have been somehow or
another mitigated by communicating these
results to Nevada earlier well we didn't
announce the fight that John was gonna
fight and in Nevada Intel October but in
October so you have said hey well here's
this issue sure potentially but issue
was you saw it hadn't come to that they
were in the middle of that point of
consulting with other professional
sports leagues with the other wada labs
they hadn't reached their conclusion
their science expert hadn't determined
hey this is definitely residual no
performance ancing they were still going
through that data at that point so what
they've told me is look we tried to
hurry that along as fast as possible we
wanted to make sure that that you know
we went through this and very very
detailed
no smell let's ride when when did they
reach this conclusion this so this was
early December so December 6 that letter
went out saying we've had these two
low-level positives back in August well
okay but here we are I mean this is the
end of December
what could this have been headed off at
the pass
well again when Nevada first got
notified they thought like we were
hoping well he's had four negative tests
so he's probably gonna be negative going
forward here right and that's what you
know the layperson would think ok he's
probably out of the woods now but you
know again getting back to what period
of time is this in John's preparation
and if you look at some of these numbers
and when these metabolites appear and
disappear in early August
John was preparing his defense for this
arbitration I think he had an idea based
on talking to his attorneys like hey we
got a pretty good shot here of some
mitigating factors where this is
potentially gonna get reduced so I think
you know he starts to get a little bit
motivated gets in the gym starts
training in clearly in early December
that's the period of time when our
fighters that close to a fight are
bringing down that body weight right and
their cut and body fat they're losing
you know a little bit of water so it
certainly seems to correlate these these
these pulsing you know effects with
winds just theoretical right that it's
not most tissue
absolutely it is so this positive result
was announced when so a week ago
yesterday this is you sadhas' announced
you sadhas notifies us the UFC it always
happens and they notify if any
Commission has jurisdiction at this
point this close to a fight Nevada has
jurisdiction so I get the call and you
can imagine what's going through my head
I mean I I've gotten so many these calls
now I literally for the first five or
ten minutes can bury my head in my hand
and think through exactly how this
thing's gonna play out and you know it's
going to be hey Nevada's gonna say wait
a second what's going on here we need to
root this out John's going to say Jesus
Christ like what is going on in my life
I can't get a fucking break I'm trying
to be care
I even went through what DC how DC's
gonna react and he react he's gonna be I
fucking told you this was the case this
guy's a cheater you know you saw it as
bullshit Novitsky bullshit all this
stuff goes through my head in the first
five or ten minutes what's how's Dana
gonna react house hunter gonna react
when I have to go over to his office and
explain this out to them it played out
exactly as I saw it it's it's it's some
of the worst days of my career when I
get these calls but you know everyone
was notified and in Nevada was in our
office two days later and again I mean
there's been some criticism of them out
there I don't fault them this is a
complicated issue that optically doesn't
look great and to do anything in a rush
manner would be difficult they did
everything they could to afford us
having a hearing problem was it was just
it was too close to to a fight so
essentially to get this out this issue
with optics right because it you go on
Twitter everybody's calling them achieve
everybody saying that you know anybody
that sanctions this is your sanctioning
cheating for someone to get an
understanding of what this is like it
actually requires probably more than
we've done now over the last hour and 15
minutes yeah and I appreciate this forum
I mean Dana and I went on SportsCenter
and announced it in three minute hit and
I came out of there doing absolutely
everyone in the world is gonna say this
is bullshit you can't this is we're
gonna have a hard time doing this in two
hours here yeah this is things yeah
you've got you've got to delve into it
and you've also have to put your trust
and reliance on these experts they have
a education professional career of 20 to
25 years to come up with these absolutes
there's no one else in the world but
maybe a dozen people that can to come up
with these conclusions you do have to
put your you know your faith in in their
background and and their careers and
their knowledge and education and you
know I read which those absolutes were
that there was no evidence of any
reinjection this is by multiple experts
and that John would not have retained
any performance benefit based on these
low-level picogram amounts well I'm
happy that we were gonna have this out
there so people if they have
time if they're really that interested
in it this is probably a more in-depth
discussion of this than you're going to
get anywhere else but I really wish we
could have gotten something like this to
Nevada and Nevada could have gone over
this and looked at what what I'm seeing
what you're saying it seems to me that
we could have just had some sort of a
meeting and kept this fight in Nevada
and it would have saved everybody a lot
of heartache yeah I mean I think things
were pointing in that but there was no
guarantees on that baby it's the hot
come on it's Vegas you know the other
thing that was being looked at was was
fairness to these athletes really you're
gonna clear athlete you're gonna put
John and Gus maybe more importantly in a
position where he doesn't know until two
days or a day before whether this fight
is happening or not I mean these and and
not even mentioning the other fighters
on the card and look you can talk to and
I have to Shawn and Mick and and Dana
and Hunter all these fighters want to be
on the big pay-per-views they know the
bigger the fight at the top of the card
the more eyes are on that fight and when
you have a spectacular fight and the
first second fight on the card if it's
on a big pay-per-view with a giant fight
at the top of it that can propel your
career your next fight you could be
fighting the main event on you know a
fight pass and progress from there so I
think you know I think it's accurate to
say that generally everybody wants these
these cards to be as big as possible and
when all the experts are telling us a
100 percent this isn't a sanction be
he's not retaining any
performance-enhancing benefits I think
and clearly Dana and Hunter thought this
we have an obligation to do what we can
do for fairness for John definitely for
Gus for the rest of the card to try to
make this fight happen going forward is
there any way we could ever prevent
something like this from happening again
with a similar situation in place like
Nevada so here's I think we have a
couple solutions to that and it's not
necessarily relative to the Commission
but one thing that obviously protected
John a lot in this was the frequency of
testing you know if you look at his
numbers and and these were these were
instances where they collected samples
but in many of these cases they did
multiple tests on him and that means you
know the tests I'm reading were for the
anabolic steroid
but in addition to that they may have
done biological passport tests on that
same collection that may have done an
HGH test an EPO test and this is all
confidential that you sought it doesn't
release all this information um burrs on
the publicly available website but you
don't see what those tests are done so
the reality and they just told me this
is John was one of the most if not the
most tested athlete over these last six
months when you look at total amount of
tests on his samples excuse me one thing
that obviously protected him here was
that volume of testing and so you saw it
came to us and said you know hey we
think that you probably should you know
up the amount of tests that you're doing
so we just renewed a contract with you
sada and we reduce we're increasing our
testing numbers by thirty to forty
percent we currently the first three
years of the program are under contract
for approximately 2,700 tests and
starting this next year we're gonna up
that to around forty three forty four
hundred tests so I think they're it's
going to be more of a burden they're
gonna be you know you're Saad is showing
up in more doorsteps early in the
morning of more of our athletes but I
think this is a perfect example that
that increased volume of testing
actually can be a protectant to the
athlete especially when you're talking
these low-level pika gram quantities and
contaminated cases and things like that
we just got to get a fleet s-- to stop
taking any supplement that's not
third-party tested great point so here's
what we've done in that area so about
three months ago you sada hosted a
working group it included the UFC myself
and our sports nutritionist Clint
wattenberg who you've met were there
Major League Baseball was there the
Department of Defense was there there's
been war fighters who have purchased
supplements at bases over in Iraq and
Afghanistan that contain a Federer and
other bat products some of them
potentially have died as a result of
ingesting them so they definitely have
an interest in safety and dietary
supplements and you saw it as experts
were there what we did is we invited in
the major third-party certification
companies and each one took a half-day
presenting what their programs look like
we went back and huddled after each one
and huddled at the conclusion and said
what
is a platinum standard third party
certification look like let's all these
presentations we got what was strengths
and ones weaknesses and the others and
we have to put a perfect one together
what was it what does it look like
over the last month we've been authoring
a paper that's going to be published in
a scientific journal going over what
that gold standard Platinum standard
looks like going forward any third party
certification company that can meet that
and there some that are very close I
think will be able to do it very quickly
we are going to say you saw it is going
to say this is an approved line of
supplements we approve you to take this
and this is something that we've been
unable to do in the first three and a
half years of the program and I tell you
Joe it's the most common question I get
from our athletes what you sought
approved and as soon as I say you sada
doesn't approve any supplements but
here's how you ensure your safety they
stop listening goes in one ear out the
other this is a it's a silly suggestion
but why doesn't the UFC come up with its
own supplement line and provide them to
the fighters and say you can't take
anything else yeah I mean it's exactly
true it's that sponsorships with other
supplement line exactly there's a lot of
dynamics to it it's not as easy as yeah
doing it overnight its dysfunction
method just if you could say hey you can
take creatine you could take you know
all the multivitamins you could take you
know branch chain amino acids all these
things that have been proven to be
effective but that's that's where -
right it's like they're effective
meaning they enhance performance and
recovery but they don't do enough to be
considered a performance-enhancing drug
yeah and they're present in the food
supply - so like you know basically out
of commute you can go eat ten chicken
breasts or you know have a couple scoops
of protein if you're on the go and don't
have time to do it so I think again
apples and oranges in terms of
performance-enhancing or not so the
theory would be we haven't approved when
when I'm or Donner asked that question
what's approved I can say here's let's
say NSF NSF has 1200 supplements that
approve I'd say all 1200 of these are
proved you should only use these if
something were to happen to an athlete
the
used an approved line of supplements
it's a get-out-of-jail-free card if they
can prove it and you saw it
independently prove it there's no
sanction I think that is going to go a
long way and I'll give you a reason for
that Major League Baseball does that
they have for the last couple years now
they have some advantage and that all
their athletes are our employees and are
coming in to the same facility for
during the season so they have some
control over theirs we don't our
athletes are spread among sending 46
countries throughout the world so it's
more of a challenge but baseball said
the only supplements were allowing in
the clubhouse or in a facility are and
they use NSF supplements they had zero
contaminated supplement cases last year
they had I think they're testing numbers
were four times the amount of our
testing numbers and zero contaminated
supplements I mean the proofs in the
pudding right there so they deal with
NSF I don't know if it's a deal other
than they've examined who those
certification companies are and they
feel that they are you know at the top
of the line we don't want to exclude any
that's why we're contributing to this
paper to say look anyone could be one of
these approved lines but you must meet
this criteria for platinum standard
program but it's coming from someone
who's in a supplement business me that's
the Wild West out there boy is it I mean
there's a there's a lot of shit out
there that's just they purposely add
performance-enhancing drugs to their
stuff because it's cheap and people take
it may experience these gains and then
they sell a lot of it yeah then you get
a following exactly I saw that when I
was with the FDA there is and what they
normally will do for maybe the first six
months of the product
they'll spiked it with something if
they're going that route and then to
decrease liability thereafter they've
already got the following their stuffs
working like like hell and then they
back off just in case the government
doesn't our consumer my body must have
adapted exactly no you son ship this
it's really such a shame because this is
such a fantastic fight I mean there's so
much drama involved already just having
John Jones returning having Alexander
Gustafsson looking absolutely
sensational in his last fight with
Glover Teixeira
the trash talk and hype and intensity
and the fact that this is really other
than DC versus John this is the fight
that people want to see in the light
heavyweight division and look nobody's
saying and I'm certainly not saying that
John didn't do anything wrong he
obviously did John has two times now
tested positive for prohibited substance
says however in both occasions
arbitrators have determined that it was
not done intentionally so anyone who
says that all John's getting off light
on this he's been suspended for almost
two and a half years for a lack with a
lack of evidence of any intentional use
or cheating you know how much money he's
probably lost in those two and a half
years how many tens of millions of
dollars reputation anybody who says that
he got off you know scot-free on this I
would argue the otherwise he was felled
to the strictest of liability standards
out there someone at the top of their
game money earning potential like him
there's also an incredible amount of
stress and and human being he feels in
here's what people are you know saying
about them and that's that's got to be
very difficult also coming off of this
massive suspension so he's coming off of
the suspension which was huge very very
public very worldwide after the cocaine
the car accident the the previous the
the dick pills that had the the stuff
and I mean this is so many things and
then to have this happen literally the
week of and have the fight moved to
California I mean and I get the
skepticism that's out there yeah yeah
not without delving into this I've spent
hours and hours and these experts have
spent their careers looking into that
that's really what's required to get a
comprehension and understanding of it
another thing another argument John's
being treated specially because he's
John but we had another athlete that
this somewhat identical thing happened
to but nowhere near at the level of John
so a kid by a name of grant Dawson so
grant Dawson last summer was in the Dana
White contender series had an awesome
fight Dana's like you got a contract kid
we get them into the u sada program the
reduce auto program requires you to
disclose everything you've used
going back twelve months or one year the
idea being look even though you weren't
under the program if you used you know
oral to rentable eight or nine months
ago there could still be an advantage
that you beginning you know not going to
necessarily suspend you because you
weren't subject to the program then
we're not gonna let you fight it right
away you can have to be in the program
for a certain amount of time testing
clean so he didn't he didn't disclose
that he was using anything his first
test he tests positive for m3 metabolite
low levels he goes to arbitration argues
testifies under oath I've never heard of
this substance I've never taken it I
would never cheat here are all the
supplements I was using I can't find it
the arbitrator here's the hearing you
sada goes of them says hold on a second
we're looking into this matter talking
to baseball whatever you sought it comes
out that hey we can't prove that this
didn't enter his substance a year before
that disclosure required him to disclose
what he was using so he was basically
led off and ineligible so John's not the
only person in the UFC that this has
happened to not notwithstanding other
professional sports leagues other
Olympics it's happened to other athletes
he's not the only one so I think what's
important for people I get the
skepticism but I think it's very
important that people don't accuse
someone of something that they didn't do
and I want you if you're listening to
this I want you to imagine if you're
John Jones and you're trying to get your
shit together and you didn't do anything
new you didn't do anything different
we've got to have a path of redemption
for people you got you have to and if
John as you're saying and all these
tests conclude if he didn't do anything
folks you got to stop saying he's
cheating you get you got he's not
cheating if he's not cheating and if
it's showing that these are these
long-term residual metabolites that are
in incredibly small dosage it's there's
real cheaters out there and John's
fucked up he has fucked up and you were
all right to be upset at him when he
fucked up this is not as lisa's my
conclusion after talking to you and
and and I've talked to some independent
scientists that were skeptical about
some of the aspects of it but they're
also they're skeptical because they're
not up to date perhaps on the
differences in this this pulsing effect
or the fact that this is something that
is relatively there's not a lot of a lot
of documentation on this and this is
this is something that's relatively new
in terms of our ability to understand
pika grams our ability to understand
this pulsing effect all these different
these variables that you have to take
into account when it comes to this
people love to call it cheap they love
to it's good it's good that the people
are out there keeping people honest I
think you got a we got a look at this
the right way and I think the right way
is what you're the way you're laying it
out here I don't see any holes in this
so you know a couple things in the
future that people can look forward to
look we want and john wants to fight
nevada again and nevada is basically
said look i think we understand this is
cheb we need to have this hearing there
will be a public hearing on this my
understanding is early quarter one so
look you know don't take my word for it
wait until january i'm sure they'll call
some of these experts to testify
introduce some of these documents to the
public rather longer even than this
conversation yes but I would be my guess
so yeah I mean that's that's to come the
whole thing such a disaster for
everybody else on the card for amended
Nunez and Chris cyborg and for all the
people in the undercard I mean it's just
to have them to move all the way to
California what I'm happy about those
that the fight is still happening I'm
very happy the fight is still happening
I am and again I have to take an
objective look about is this fair as it
relates to how our policy and what the
rules are and you know when you have you
know one of the experts in the world dr.
Daniel act nura this Mertle laboratory
issue an absolute statement like there
is no evidence the DHC mt has been
readmitted and that based on these low
levels he does not retaining a
performance enhancing benefit how out of
fairness and implementing the program do
you prevent this fight from happening
you can't do that it would be
categorically unfair
moving forward from here what changes
and what do we do to stop something like
this from happening well again I think
the increased volume of testing is going
to help I think being able to
specifically direct our athletes to
approve line of supplements will help
but you know hey we can Don and I can
message the hell out of these things but
you know it takes the athletes and their
camps to listen to what we're saying so
I mean if anything good comes out of
this hopefully it's it's a warning to
those other out others out there about
how careful you need to be so to just to
wrap this up so people understand if you
if you want to put a button on this
there's no evidence whatsoever of any
micro dosing so this is one of the
concerns people worried about micro
dosing no evidence whatsoever of micro
dosing wouldn't be a substance you would
generally microdose you do endogenous
substances not exogenous there's also no
evidence of the short-term and
medium-term medium of medium-term yep
metabolites that were recognized by rich
ankov again I think it is yes hey why do
I agree I have a tough time with this is
very it's very clear that's the only
test we have no parent compound ever
around as well these are these the only
test we have that show these long-term
short-term and medium-term metabolites
these the short-term in the medium-term
ones that would be indicative of him
taking it recently don't exist in any
point in time during these testing
correct so this is most likely something
that is inside of his body that is in
incredibly small levels and is it safe
to say that the detection levels that
the detection methods are far superior
today than they were a year ago two
years ago three years ago increased by
thousands of percentage points in
sensitivity I mean again and how
recently over the last five years and by
how recently have they if they improved
from today versus a year ago yeah I
believe so again you know when I heard
about the 1 picogram detection of the m3
metabolites you know that was something
that happened this
I'm not aware of that ever being that
low of a number in any time in the past
so I think you know literally week by
week month by one month as we're going
here that level of sensitivity is
increasing essentially no possible
performance enhancing benefits from
these incredibly low levels that's what
the experts are telling me look and
again I'm not the expert I don't want to
profess that I am but what what do I
have to go to I need to go to those
experts that have made careers out of
studying these substances and the
benefits and they are all universally
telling me that there's no performance
enhancing benefit full compliance by
John Jones in terms of being there for
you sada at every single test notifying
his whereabouts doing everything by the
book in terms of what the UFC requires
and what you saw to require yes so our
program has a three-strike policy so
basically you know if you miss a test
for an unexplained reason three times
then it could be a violation John's
never had one whereabouts strike he's
always been available when you saw us
tried to test them and again especially
recency recently one of the most tested
athletes in the UFC wasn't there one
test in the past where you saw two
showed up at the gym and there was some
sort of speculation that John was hiding
under the ring preview sada not really
so that was pre USANA before I got here
I've heard about that and all the
details I don't know whether it's true
or not I think there's a Nevada State
Athletic Commission test my recollection
is right but it wasn't you saw the test
okay so there's no reason in terms of
how you're looking at this particular
case that this fight should not take
place or that John should be sanctioned
any further there isn't and look it's
it's the least compelling argument but I
think you know you have to look at it
you have to look at the common-sense
approach to this a guy who went through
a year and a half of most suspension to
very I would categorize as embarrassing
public hearings in California along
arbitration hearing before McLaren all
this science is rooted out about how
long this stuff stays in your system
long term metabolites four months maybe
years you're gonna choose to use oral
Tour in a ball still after going through
all that
leading up to a fight I don't buy that
see I don't think I think I agree with
what you're saying but in terms of
people fucking up there are no bounds on
human stupidity and in terms of people's
ability to do impulsive things that are
irrational that wind up sabotaging their
career there's almost more of an
indication that people are willing to do
that than not is it's very it's you're
less likely and this is in terms of
especially in particularly in fighters
fighters are ridiculously impulsive it's
one of the things that categorizes and
it's a characteristic of the type of
human being that gets involved in that
line of work in the first place they're
wild motherfuckers they're crazy they do
crazy shit and I just I don't I don't
buy that that would be new level crazy
and look again I categorize a new level
crazy guy least compelling argument I
agree all these compelling but I think
we'd be remiss if we didn't at least
consider that I okay I see your point I
don't buy it
that that part I don't buy I buy all the
science and I'm a big John Jones fan I
mean you call me John Jones suck up all
day long I think he's one of the
greatest of all time and I think it's
not over for him I think he still could
reach I don't even think he's at his
peak I think he still got time to be the
greatest of all time if he hasn't
already achieved that but I think that
he's also he's a wild man you know it's
one of the reasons why he's so great
it's one of the reasons why he opened up
the fight with Shogun at 22 years old
with a flying knee and he's a wild
motherfucker that's who he is and it's
one of many reasons besides his talent
that he's so goddamn good III know the
lows of the lows he's gone through these
last two years you wouldn't believe how
low those lights are and so again look I
don't disagree with you then that's not
out of the area of consideration but man
I I just don't I think anybody could be
reckless
I hope you're right I also worry that
fighters often in times and I'm not
accusing John of doing this but often
times surround themselves with morons
and these morons give them poor advice
and these morons think that they have
ways to skirt systems and and get around
the rules
and they have people that you know with
throw much fancy words their way and
they want to believe and this happens
all the time this happens all the time
with fighters in regards to financial
management and an advice that they get
with that I mean I've seen like
world-class fighters do ridiculous shit
in terms of strength and conditioning
because some asshole with a good
vocabulary talks them into some nonsense
this is just one of the things that
happens with fighters and often times
they can be around someone who gives
them poor advice in terms of what they
can and cannot get away with when it
comes to supplementation and when it
comes to steroid use yeah absolutely and
I see that that all over the place in
John's case however to give credit where
credit's due
you know his team after the initial
positive with the dick pills was very
interactive with me and Donna and you
know checking supplements hey what line
should we go to show they you know to
give them credit they definitely showed
increased exercise of care when it came
to supplementation with John well that's
great to hear and I really hope this is
a thing of the past and I hope this is
the last time we ever have to talk about
John in this term and that moving
forward we just talked about him in
terms of his performances and his his
fights and you know what he's already
achieved
yeah champion of all time anything else
yeah so I was gonna bring this up at the
beginning but the Golden Snitch that's
first of all that's Brendan jabs name he
gave it to you so taking on a life of
its own and I think I think you know the
last time we talked about Donner asking
Alexa who yes so see what Siri says it's
what I'm saying let's see what
seriousness but I've never tried this
hold on a second who is the Golden
Snitch Oh kwatak it's something in Harry
Potter yeah last time on and I mentioned
you know was in I think my Wikipedia
profile it had me as aka the golden
slash somebody took this hey Siri who is
the Golden Snitch
Oh Siri Siri keeps going with wattage
so so someone took it down from yeah
yeah yeah they do that well I think we
talked about you're like I don't know
they they just did it I got hearing them
so I think I told you that's not I've
already co-workers call me it yes my
family calls me a call you the goldens
friends call me it I was at the MMA
awards last year and some Yahoo had a
few pops back at me is screaming in
between presentations the Golden Snitch
I'm sleeping down in my chair my
girlfriend is the golden UFC on the end
I popped up beautiful just just fucking
when they do that just put your hands up
in the air make you one so you know
definitely should make a shirt during
shows I'll sit pretty close to the cage
go out in between a fight into the
bathroom and it's not Joe Rogan level
well half the damn arena standing up
excited to see you walking in and out of
the fighter walk but two or three people
and that walk when I go backstage to
check on you side of the Golden Snitch
so give them reckon you know Steve Reed
you know Steve Reed are bald security
that yeah I'd asked looking guy on stage
he'll come backstage just mate they're
calling me the snitch out there man I
think I'm you that poor guy pays for it
we were teams the scary guy dude he's a
great dude that's guy is at the top of
his game in security unbelievable yeah I
saw him one time in Las Vegas during a
fight he was sitting on the floor
something's happened in the fight the
crowd goes fucking bananas and everybody
stands up on the floor Steve stands up
and just motions sit down and the entire
fucking section side down 200 plus
people I'm like toot if you can without
even having to touch somebody just stand
up by your presence alone and control
something like that I mean the best I've
ever seen he's lost legitimacy to my
story here it's not marketing but let me
finish the story here so I'm in Chicago
this year I think there was a
pay-per-view you were there right yes so
something happened and I was late
getting to the arena and they had cut
off kind of the loading dock I couldn't
get to it so I had my oldest daughter
with me and so we're having to walk
through where all the crowds walking in
and you know dudes Olive Golden Snitch
they're gonna picture Golden Snitch my
daughters like what the fuck's that what
is going on so she's 22
so two days ago Christmas morning I'm
opening up presents so I get the
presents for my daughters the three of
them and my middle daughter is very
artistic and so they create these cool
sculpted beer mugs and there's four of
them one of them's like bald guy brewing
nowitzki something and one of them says
Golden Snitch Brewing Company so it's
cool looking thing and she she drew me a
black and white kind of rendition of all
four which I'm gonna hang up really cool
so then my girlfriend's there so she
hands me the box and she's been telling
me all along she owes I got you the best
fucking present ever in the history of
presents Michael the hell is this so I
open up the box series of t-shirts I
think what size are you large large
there we go man so you since you created
it you literally and figuratively have
to wear it now so that picture there's
some there we go baby
so I posted pictures taken King man
series Moscow I think I can say this
hopefully they'll let me back in but
it's out in front of KGB or FSB
headquarters so that building in the
background is KGB eff has now known as
FSB oh wow so yeah so I posted a picture
she got me like 20 shirts I put them on
my private Instagram Facebook everybody
in the world's like take my money man
where can I get one where the weigh-ins
tomorrow hi you guys created you gotta
own it now I got one for Shaw to you can
shops mad at you is he yeah he called
you the golden rap now change I thought
maybe
he's informed misinformed he thinks
first of all that you were an employee
of USANA there yeah and that now you're
an employee of the UFC
he's misinformed about that and I think
he he likes to call skeptical he's
skeptical Hippo I am skeptical as well
but I one thing that I've learned from
doing this podcast over the years is
that there's no fucking way there's it's
a it's impossible to know everything it
is impossible and you have to rely on
the expertise of the people who have
spent a lifetime studying these things
that's very important here's another
thing there's no way these people could
be lying about this and it wouldn't
massively damage their career going full
they'd be done the someone would find
out someone would get to them the other
scientists without them there would be
studies done there would be papers done
the internet would find out about it
everybody would know there's no way it's
it's pretty unprecedented in writing
with the lack of these studies they were
chenko one being the my saying is even
right how do you say it rich anko the
change' it's pretty impressive they
would put these absolutes in writing you
know with this lot you know I think they
looked at it very hard and detailed and
obviously they weren't quick and turning
it around and we were to love this
decision to be made a lot earlier so we
could have routed it and vetted it out
with Nevada but they did indeed you know
sign their names to these pretty
absolute statements and what what else
can the UFC and I do when these experts
are putting those absolutes out there
and I get that people go oh well it's
good you actually do you gotta
understand folks this would be career
suicide this is this is this is
cutting-edge science we're talking about
there's too many people that would have
a vested interest in calling bullshit
it's it's not something you don't fuck
around when it comes to these things the
people that are at the the front of the
line when it comes to catching people on
these things and the science that
they're imploringly they're that they're
involved with it's this is not you get
you can't like guess on the outside with
no education it's just not wise and this
is what I keep seeing over and over
again is pee
that have some knowledge a little bit of
knowledge and they're there pretending
that they're they have a PhD in the shit
go I mean for those that want to you
know do more detective work
go read MacLaren's written decision on
John's July 2018 July 2018 test go read
the rich egg off study on the DHC MT and
the metabolites
and go read the recent clomiphene study
where it shows us chlorinated substance
it's pulsing it goes away
comes back higher than before goes away
comes back lower goes away comes back
higher crazy stuff okay um we good when
it when can someone get one of these she
only made about fifteen oh man you gotta
sell these you have to sell these maybe
do some fresh maybe do some for charity
or young Jamie died mom yeah someone
needs to sell these we could talk but
then it's not exclusive you want to have
the exclusive shirt where nobody else
can get on anything I'm not into that
ma'am alright Jeff thank you very much
here fine please folks please have an
open mind please I know you want to call
bullshit there's times there's times to
call bullshit but there's times to
recognize that this is a complicated
issue and that we've laid it out as I'm
I'm pretty convinced appreciate a joke
and I'm done so you might be smarter
than me all right bye everybody
[Applause]
[Music]